This is the Postfix 3.2 (experimental) release.

The stable Postfix release is called postfix-3.1.x where 3=major
release number, 1=minor release number, x=patchlevel.  The stable
release never changes except for patches that address bugs or
emergencies. Patches change the patchlevel and the release date.

New features are developed in snapshot releases. These are called
postfix-3.2-yyyymmdd where yyyymmdd is the release date (yyyy=year,
mm=month, dd=day).  Patches are never issued for snapshot releases;
instead, a new snapshot is released.

The mail_release_date configuration parameter (format: yyyymmdd)
specifies the release date of a stable release or snapshot release.

If you upgrade from Postfix 3.0 or earlier, read RELEASE_NOTES-3.1
before proceeding.

Major changes with snapshot 20160625
====================================

Support in the Postfix SMTP server for propagating the local SMTP
server IP address and port. This affects the following Postfix
interfaces:

- Policy delegation. The server address and port are available as
"server_address" and "server_port". See SMTPD_POLICY_README for an
overview of available attributes.

- Milter applications. The server address and port are available
as "{daemon_addr}" and "{daemon_port}". See MILTER_README for a
table of available attributes.

- Cyrus SASL. The server address and port are now passed to the
sasl_server_new() function as "ipaddress;port".

- XCLIENT protocol. The server address and port can be specified
as "DESTADDR" and "DESTPORT". See XCLIENT_README for a description
of the attribute syntax. The new attributes may be of interest for
nxginx.

Major changes with snapshot 20160527
====================================

Postfix cidr tables now support if..endif, and pattern negation
with "!", just like regexp and pcre tables. The if..endif can speed
up lookups by skipping over irrelevant patterns, and can make rule
maintenance easier because rules for a network can now be placed
inside if..endif.  See the cidr_table(5) manpage for syntax details.
